<p><h1>Calorie Legislation</h1></p>

<p><h1>The calorie legislation introduced by the government on the 6th April means two things: everyone is faced with calorie information in any business employing more than 250 people, and diet culture is finding more and more ways to engrain itself in our lives.
</p></h1>
The legislation is supposedly meant to inform people of the content in food so they can make ‘better’ choices when eating out, with the core belief being that people will have smaller portions when eating out at restaurants or cafes. This does not apply to everyone though and fundamentally, it will increase disordered eating behaviours, calorie counting, and make social eating far harder for those who already struggle with an eating disorder or body weight/shape issues. Young people, who are bombarded with diet culture propaganda on social media and are under a huge amount of pressure to look and act a certain way, could be seriously impacted by this legislation.

This article has been written for anyone at all who doesn’t like the new law and finds calories difficult or invasive. You don’t have to have an eating disorder for it to apply to you; so many people struggle with weight/shape concerns, and the new legislation just makes it harder. If you struggle with calorie information at all, then hopefully this will help.
The first part challenges unhelpful thinking around food and calories so that over time, hopefully eating out becomes easier and easier. The second part has some helpful tips on how to cope with the calories and some practical steps you can take that have an immediate effect.


Challenging Unhelpful Thinking
First of all, let’s tackle the message written on every menu, every food packet, pretty much everything nutrition-related. It’s the message ‘adults need around 2000 kcal a day’, otherwise known as the statement of daily calorie needs. This statement is one of averages; it doesn’t apply to every adult because everyone has different needs for a variety of reasons. Between exercise, metabolism, hormones, medication, body mass, and a million other factors, how could it possibly be true that everyone requires around the same intake everyday? It doesn’t make any sense at all to suggest a single average that everyone should comply to, so try not to listen to this under-thought message and instead pay attention to your body and what it needs.

Equally, listen to what your body wants! It’s totally okay and normal to
eat even if you don’t think your body ‘needs’ it or you’re not feeling hungry. Social occasions like birthdays or catching up with friends at a cafe often have sweet treats or a frothy coffee; enjoy it in the moment and make memories! A good way of distracting yourself if you’re struggling is to focus on the people around you and the activity you’re doing, rather than ruminating over what’s in the food. Remember, what you’re eating won’t make any real difference to your weight or shape on its own but you’ll have the memory of being there for the rest of your life.

That last point was so good, it needs its own paragraph. To reiterate, it’s super important to remember that one meal won’t make a difference! In the grand scheme of things, a dinner with your friends or a night out drinking won’t impact how you look. Even if you’re put off by the number of calories on the menu, it’s much better to have something you genuinely want to eat rather than an alternative that just wouldn’t be the same. You have mental hunger as well as physical hunger, and if your brain wants something in particular then don’t let any initial anxiety put you off just because of a number on the menu (unless it’s the price!).


Some Helpful Tips
Lastly, you might know someone who struggles with an eating disorder or weight/shape concerns who is affected by the new legislation. Eating disorders affect 1.25 million people in the UK [1], so the odds are that you know someone who’s struggling. To help them and yourself, here’s a list of things that might be helpful to keep in mind on a night out or when eating with friends.


Talk about it.
Talking helps more than you’d think, and if someone’s finding things
tough then offer to listen to how they’re feeling. If it’s you that needs to talk, then keep in mind that even acknowledging whether you’re anxious, afraid, or distressed can
help loads, and talking through how a meal felt afterwards can be especially useful. It means you can rationalise the thoughts and challenge unhelpful ones. For example, if a meal was difficult, you can remind yourself that it won’t make a difference in the grand scheme of things. The anxiety will pass, and everything will feel okay again eventually.


Avoid looking at the calories to minimise anxiety. 
By asking for a calorie-free menu or for someone to read the menu for you, you could avoid looking at the calories and reduce some of the anxiety you otherwise would have felt. It might not take away all the anxiety and it’s not a long-term solution, but challenging difficult thoughts isn’t
always possible in the moment. Sometimes you just want to have a nice meal without it having to be some sort of ‘challenge’ or ‘trial’ and remember, you’re there to have a good time with your friends, not for a therapy session. So to make it easier to enjoy yourself, avoid looking at the calories if you think it’ll help.


Find distractions. Finding things to think about other than the food can be one of the best ways to remove ruminations and anxious thinking. It can be tough, but
reorienting your attention towards the occasion or the conversation is surprisingly helpful. If you see a friend struggling, try to engage them more in what you’re talking about but keep in mind that if they need a moment to themselves, then they might not be very talkative initially.
Look at the menu beforehand. Finding something you’re comfortable with before going out might really help you get used to the idea of it, and let any initial anxiety settle. Choosing a backup might also be a good idea, just in case your first choice isn’t available.


Take a break. 
Taking a moment to yourself by stepping outside can be a great way to
address how you’re thinking and face your feelings. This can be especially helpful if you’re feeling overwhelmed and the restaurant is noisy or busy. The new legislation is going to significantly impact so many people, and it’s not fair that calorie information is forced on us like this. So far, all we can do is use coping strategies and remind ourselves that we are stronger than a number on a menu. It can be so difficult and if
you struggle or you know someone who does, it’s truly awful what this legislation means for social eating and going out. If you don’t particularly find calories invasive but do find them uncomfortable in any way at all, then the tips above are really useful if you want to give them a go. I hope this has helped you and if not, at least you have some strategies to keep in your back pocket in case you ever need them.


Contributed by Will Mills and Lucy Morris, BTT Members
[1] https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/media-centre/eating-disorder-statistics